# The Foundation

In school my homeroom teacher had us do an hour of reading
each day.

Each day I would write down how many pages I read and turn in the log at the end of the week.

I was asked to stay late once to meet with my teacher.

I had gone from reading 30 pages a day to no more than 3.

This was because I had started reading the Tao Te Ching by Lao Tsu.

```
Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub;
It is the center hole that makes it useful.
Shape clay into a vessel;
It is the space within that makes it useful.
Cut doors and windows for a room;
It is the holes which make it useful.
Therefore profit comes from what is there;
Usefulness from what is not there.
```

Each time I read a page again it would mean something else. I couldn't stop
reading the same page over and over again.

The book stays the same but my understanding of it changes even today.

I learned the values of open source from Ted Leung more than 10 years ago
but my understanding of them continues to change.

What you will read is my current understanding in the world as it is today.

The world will change. My undestanding will change. But I hope that many of
these words won't change even as they continue to have new meaning.

My "Tao of Open Source" is only 3 principals.

* Participation
* Transparency
* Efficacy

No principal is absolute.

Each project must find its own balance of these principals.

A sustainable project is a participatory, transparent, and effective.
It is none of these things at the absolute expense of another.

An open source project can't sustain itself without these principals.

Because a community can't thrive without these principals.

Because people can't thrive without these principals.

Because Open Source is people.
