# Brief History of Open Source

Editors Notes:

This is not intended to be a thorough and all inclusive history of Open Source.

This history is only meant to weave together a narrative that includes:

* tracing the origins of values that make open source sustainable.
* identifying the causes of growth in prior generations of open source.
* identifying the mechanisms by which sustainable values were adapted to
fit that new growth.

## 1959

MIT's Building 26 was home to the Tech Model Railroad Club (TMRC) and,
deep in its basement, the Electronic Accounting Machinery room (EAM room).

TMRC was home to "hackers," individuals who would go to great lengths to
overcome the technical challenges of electronic railroad making. In contrast
The EAM room, staffed only by those with official priviledge, was guarded as if
the machines would die if miss-used.

In the EAM room a select few would punch instructions onto manilla cards and
then send them upstairs to the IBM 704 (The Hulking Giant), a multi-million
dollar computer the size of a modern San Francisco apartment.

But at night, the high-noon of the hacker, the EAM room was left
unguarded. Hackers of the TMRC had no interest in dealing with the process and
pagentry that accompanied bringing cards to the IBM 704 but what they
eventually discovered, tucked away in the EAM room, was a special keypunch
machine called the 407. One hacker, Peter Samson, realized that with a plug
board and a mess of wiring they could turn the 407 into a computer of sorts.

This was the first step in bringing their hacker ethos to
the world of computing. These hackers would introduce a set of values to
computer programming which we now, more than 50 years later,
can see as the life blood of Open Source Sustainability.

## The Rise and Fall of the MIT Hackers

TMRC hackers revelled in wires and power
supplys. They valued the process of getting something to work as much, probably
more, than the end result of any of that work. They shared ideas and
collaborated liberally. They spent late nights with each other talking and
tinkering. TMRC was a paradise for a particular kind of person and just the fact
that so many had found each other was something special.

When the TMRC hackers turned their attention to another machine in
Building 26, the TX-0, which used paper tape instead of punch cards, everything
changed.
Spools of tape would come to contain utilities and routines that everyone
was free to use and improve upon, shaving off operations
and inventing new optimizations.

The hacker ethos thrived around the TX-0 and started to resemble a way of
life for some. Access to computers and the tools of learning should be
unlimited. Barriers to learning, collaborating, and contributing
were harshly criticised.

Timeshare systems that limited your freedom to use computers
were hacked or discarded so that people could use, learn, and develop more
freely. The TX-0 would give way to newer computers and hackers came to dominate
a growing field within MIT, Artificial Intelligence.

In 1963 Project Mac coalesced most MIT hackers into the "AI Group"
which would continue to grow and lead to the formation of the MIT AI Lab in
1970. During this time many hackers, and their ethos, first began to disperse
from MIT out west to Stanford and the Bay Area.

In the 1970s the MIT AI Lab would start to produce Lisp machines,
general purpose computers designed for running the primary language in
the field of AI: Lisp. By the early 1980s two companies had spun out from the
lab to commercialize Lisp machines: Symbolics and Lisp Machines Inc (LMI). This
pulled hackers away from MIT into private enterprise. By the early 1980s none
were left, sucked into the void of private enterprise.

Well, not *all* of them were gone. One remained.

## Richard Stallman

By 1983 Richard Stallman (RMS) was
["The Last of the True Hackers"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackers:_Heroes_of_the_Computer_Revolution#Epilogue:_The_Last_of_the_True_Hackers)
at the MIT AI Lab. Stallman came to the lab as a programmer in 1971 while he
finished a physics degree at Harvard. Stallman found his true home in hacker
culture and became its standard-bearer.

Stallman was furious at what the AI Lab had become after his contemporaries
left for the private sector.
The lab was now full of "tourists" who would come to the lab because of its
liberal usage policies
but never stuck around to improve upon what enabled the lab to be great.
Richard had to watch his paradise wither and die.

Richard too aim at Symbolics to exact some measure of vengence.
Symbolics was the more commercialized LISP company
as Lisp Machines Inc (LMI) tried to organize itself on hacker principals.
Symbolics was also more aggressive about hiring away hackers from the AI Lab.

The initial LISP Operating System was shared by MIT, LMI, and Symbolics but
Symbolics eventually took its work proprietary in order to try and gain a
competitive advantage over LMI.

RMS vowed never to use a Symbolics LISP machine, to never help or collaborate
with any Symbolics developer, and devoted his time to ruining them.

He followed the improvements and bug fixes Symbolics would make and would then
re-engineer the same features and fixes for the code shared by MIT and LMI.
Richard was effectively matching the work of over a dozen skilled Symbolics
engineers. Symbolics was not happy "He calls it reverse engineering. We call it
theft of trade secrets."

Richard had nothing left to lose.

["I'm the last survivor of a dead culture," said RMS. "And I don't really belong to the world anymore. And in some ways I feel I ought to be dead."](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackers:_Heroes_of_the_Computer_Revolution#Epilogue:_The_Last_of_the_True_Hackers) [from Hackers by Steve Levy]

Even with all the work he had done on the Lisp Operating System RMS
was best known for his editor EMACS. Richard shared EMACS with anyone
who agreed to contribute back any improvements they made. He called this
agreement the "EMACS commune."

When RMS finally left the AI Lab he did so with the intention
of building a new operating system under the principles of the hacker ethos.
His first tasks were not the kernel but the utitilities on top of a kernel
users needed most. As he published these utilities (emacs, gcc, gdb) he would
write public licenses for each that attempted to codify the "EMACS commune" and
persist hacker values like open access and collaboration. These would be
standardized and improved upon as the GNU Public License (GPL) which
would come to be used by not just Richard's code but by thousands of developers
around the world.

As more developers adopted his license they also adopted the principals and
values Richard wanted to persist. The "last hacker" had planted seeds in
fertile ground that grew into the thriving community we live in today.

## Tim O'Reilly

Tim started as a technical writer a few years after getting his BA from
Harvard in 1975. By 1983 he had setup a small business in a converted barn in
Newton Massachussets publishing technical manuals for UNIX systems. These were
the manuals you received when you purchased a proprietary computer and operation
system in the early 80s.

O'Reilly was able to retain the publishing rights to the manuals they produced
for other companies, allowing him to sell the manuals independent from the
purchase of any hardware or software. O'Reilly Media also produced several
"Nutshell Handbooks" which were simpler versions of the more thorough manuals.

"Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog" was published in 1992 by O'Reilly
media. This was a guide to the new but growing "Internet." The book was modeled
after the influential counterculture magazine "Whole Earth Catalog"
that proved formative for a generation of hippies, activists, and an
impressionable Steve Jobs.

Richard Stallman had taken the final spark of hacker ethos and lit a fire he
called "Free Software," a nod to "Free Speech" and "Free Expression." **The
Internet poured gasoline on that fire.**

The hacker ethos said that anyone who could enter the room should be free to
access the computer in it and to iterate on its software. As computers entered
the home and the Internet connected those computers the hacker ethos of access
and collaboration could be applied across continents.

Sitting in the cross section of proprietary software (UNIX manuals), the
Internet, and Free Software was Tim O'Reilly. Very few people could gauge the
demand for Free Software knowledge compared to similar demand for knowledge
of proprietary systems.
Even fewer understood the potential the Internet would bring.

Tim is as calm and relaxed as they come. His gentle demeanor and thirst for
knowledge makes him easily at home with geeks and hackers. His comfort and
status as a member of their community often distracts from the dramatic
difference in perspective Tim brought to the Free Software world.

Not only could Tim see that people wanted to know more about Free Software,
Tim knew first hand the comparative *quality* of Free Software having been in
the position of documenting both. Who at that time would think
that the software of expensive UNIX systems is worse, in many cases **much**
worse, than completely free alternatives?

By the mid-90's Free Software had gained a lot of attention. As individuals and
companies tried to create business models around it the term "Free Software"
grew more problematic. This lead some firms to create their own divergent terms
which only made things worse.

In 1998 a meeting was held with many of the Free Software stake holders
including Tim O'Reilly, Linus Torvalds, Larry Wall, Brian Behlendorf, Paul
Vixie, Guido van Rossum, and Eric S. Raymond. After the meeting these
participants, and many others, adopted  the term "Open Source" in place of
"Free Software."

Those adopting the term Open
Source were not removing or distancing themselves from the Free
Software community. They didn't think they were splitting a community but
simply re-branding it. It wasn't until later that the Free Software community
decided to differentiate themselves as a seperate but related movement.

In the proceeding years and even through the dotcom crash that almost
destroyed his publishing business, Tim O'Reilly remained an avid Open Source
advocate. A big part of his message was that software created and
maintained by a community was of superior quality than comparable software you
could buy.

As more companies came to depend on Open Source they also ended up funding a
new generation of contributors. These weren't part time tinkerers, they were
full time paid employees of large enterprises. Companies weren't
"giving back" to Open Source out of some notion of charity, they were building
businesses that depended on Open Source and were investing appropriately.

But this new influx of corporate investment also
created a new class of challenges for the sustainability of Open Source
projects.

## The Apache Software Foundation

The Apache HTTPD server was released in 1995. By April 1996 it was the most
popular HTTP server in the world. This was the first big fight Open Source had
against Proprietary Software that it had won. Microsoft tried hard to dominate
this space, as it had dominated most of software, but lost outright.

In June of 1999 the Apache Software Foundation was formed to provide
institutional support for the Apache HTTPD server. The structure of the
foundation was a new experiment in extending the principals of contributor
rights to the administration of a non-profit foundation.

In addition to donations from corporations and individuals the ASF's top
contributors and board members were, for the most part, fully employed by
related companies. While Apache made it clear that individuals represent
themselves, not their employers, this did put Apache in a unique position to
understand the needs of companies dependent on Open Source and to reconcile
those needs with those of Open Source developers.

It wasn't long before other projects started knocking on the ASF's door looking
for a home. As Open Source grew so did the insitutional needs of major
projects. Companies also grew to appreciate Apache's distributed ownership
and governance model over other governance models where an individual or small
group of individuals could be bought out or unduly influenced by a competitor.

As Apache accepted more projects and their contributors grew they became the
epicenter of a new generation of open source contributors. As a result, Apache
was also the center of new challenges in Open Source Sustaibility.

## Barriers to Entry

To go from a regular computer user to a contributor to EMACS in 1995 was a
long process. In addition to learning how to program a particular way you'd
need to learn communication tools like USENET, you'd have to learn a new
development toolchain and deal with some *challenging* personalities. It
wasn't a matter of just reading some docs on a website, you had to be ready to
invest yourself in that community.

As you worked your way through learning the tools and personalities you'd also
learn the project values, descendent from the hacker ethod. These values were
enshrined (and in fact legally required) by the license. Programmers of this
generation were a pretty cohesive community because they had these shared
values. Those values also brought sustainability to these projects, ensuring
that as the community grew so did the contributors. Without contributing back,
without the expectation and validation of participation, these projects would
never have continued to exist.

As the Apache Software Foundation worked on reducing these barriers to entry,
on making it easier to contribute, and as the business of software became more
dependent on Open Source, they saw an unprecedented level of new contributors.
Because many of these contributors were already familiar with developing
proprietary software using open source tools they were able to hit the ground
running without necessarily adopting any of the values the ASF was built on. If
the ASF could not persist those values how would they create a sustainable
community?

Apache believes that contributors should control the destiny of the projects.
Not the Apache Board, not the Apache Donors, the people who do the work writing
code and fixing bugs. But what would happen if a project was governed by people
who didn't share the values that make Apache, and Open Source, sustainable?

In response, the ASF built a series of processes contributors learn to live by
in their projects. Those processes effectively embed their values. The result
was that a developer who knew nothing but a corporate heirarchy shipping boxed
software could come out the other end of the process a defender of software
freedom.

Today, many of those processes, and the tools they rely on, may seem outdated.
I've been a pretty vocal critic of them myself, but it's hard to overestimate
the impact and influence of Apache in the decade between 2000 and 2010. Not
only were many notable projects at Apache, most of the key thinkers and Open
Source advocates went through Apache as well. If you were at an organization
during this time and there was an "open source person" they were almost surely
from Apache.

Ted Leung, a longtime Apache member, taught me these
values in 2006 at the Open Source Applications Foundation. Those are the values I still believe in today, the values that
inform this book. Even my criticism of how Apache now operates
come from values passed down through the Apache.

## The Modern Era

The values that this text seeks to persist: Participation, Transparency, and
Efficacy, are as old as the hacker ethos and can trace their roots to it.

These values were almost lost, and would have been lost, had we not found new
ways to persist them into the next generation of growth in software development.

There's a tendency to think that just because an idea is good it will survive,
that it will win, that this is innevitable. But history teaches us that we need
people and movements for them to win, that our history does not write
itself.

As we examine the modern era of open source, an era once again defined by
unprecedented growth and the removal of barriers to entry, we are faced with
the same problem: how do we persist the values that will allow us to be
sustainable into the next generation?

Today, the growth and distribution of projects and contributors is far too great
for a single license to be adopted by all participants or for every participant
to work through a unified process that can teach them these values.

Faced with new challenges we will need to do what those have done before, to
find creative ways to persist values that can continue to make Open Source
sustainable.
